# C# Introduction

**C#** is a language developed by Microsoft. It is a part of the `.Net` family programming languages.
So before we start to learn C#, we need to understand what is `.Net`


## 1. .Net introduction

In this tutorial, we only address the `.Net 5` and later (e.g. 6,7,8,9). Since `.Net 5`, they unified the `.NET platform`
to provide a consistent experience across application types. It contains the below main components:

- CLR (Common Language Runtime)
- Base Class Library (BCL)
- SDK and CLI (Command-Line Interface)
- Languages
- NuGet Package Manager
- ASP.NET Core: Framework for web apps
- Entity Framework Core (EF Core): Framework for Object-Relational Mapper (ORM)
- MAUI (Multi-platform App UI): Framework for building cross-platform native apps (Windows, macOS, Android, iOS) from a single codebase.
- Blazor: Framework to build interactive web UIs using C# instead of JavaScript.
- Roslyn (Compiler Platform): `Open-source compilers` for C# and VB.NET.
- MSBuild: Build engine used to compile, pack, and publish projects.

> The current LTS version is `.Net 8`. 

###  1.1 CLR(Common Language Runtime)

.NET Runtime (aka. CLR:Common Language Runtime) is the **engine** that runs `.NET applications`.

It handles memory management(garbage collection), exception handling, type safety, security, and JIT compilation.

It allows multiple **.NET family programming languages (C#, VB.NET, F#, PowerShell) to work together**.


### 1.2 Base Class Library (BCL)

A comprehensive standard library of reusable `classes and APIs`.

It includes a collection of `pre-built functions` for:

- File I/O 
- Networking 
- Collections 
- Data types 
- LINQ (Language Integrated Query)
- XML/JSON handling 
- Threading

> It reduces the need to write low-level code.

### 1.3 SDK and CLI (Command-Line Interface)

The `.Net SDK(Software Development Kit)` includes:
- the compiler
- debugger
- CLI
- libraries
- other tools.

> It's the main solution for building .NET apps

The `CLI` can be used to manage the complete .NET apps development lifecycle. Below are some useful commands:

```powershell
# Create projects
dotnet new

# add packages to the project
dotnet add package

# run projects
dotnet run

# build projects
dotnet build

# publish the project
dotnet publish
```

Install sdk on windows?

### 1.4 .NET family programming languages

.NET provides the below programming languages:
- C# (most popular, modern, object-oriented).
- F# (functional programming).
- VB.NET (less common today, older alternative to C#).
- PowerShell: It's a scripting language that interprets commands at runtime. It runs on CLR too.


### 1.5  NuGet Package Manager

System for distributing and consuming third-party and first-party libraries.

It can easily add packages to you `.Net application` via `CLI or Visual Studio`.

### 1.6 ASP.NET Core 

A framework within .NET for building **web apps, REST APIs, and real-time apps (SignalR)**.

It supports `MVC, Blazor, Web API, and Razor Pages`.


### 1.7 Entity Framework (EF Core)

An `ORM (Object-Relational Mapper)` for working with databases using C# instead of SQL.

> It simplifies data access and supports `LINQ` to interact with databases.

### 1.8 .NET MAUI (Multi-platform App UI)

MAUI can build cross-platform native apps (Windows, macOS, Android, iOS) from a single codebase.

It's a replacement of `Xamarin.Forms`.


### 1.9 Blazor

It's a framework to build interactive web UIs using `C# instead of JavaScript`.

It has wwo modes:
- Blazor Server
- Blazor WebAssembly (client-side, runs in browser)

### Types of Applications You Can Build with .NET

- Desktop Apps: Windows Forms, WPF (Windows Presentation Foundation).
- Web Apps: ASP.NET Core, Blazor.
- Mobile Apps: Xamarin, .NET MAUI (iOS & Android).
- Cloud Services: Azure Functions, AWS Lambda.
- Game Development: Unity (uses C# with .NET).
- IoT & Embedded Systems: .NET for IoT.