# Install dotnet sdk

There are two ways to install dotnet sdk on your Windows machine:
1. User windows installer
2. User tarball

## 1. Install sdk via windows 

### 1.1: Check if .NET is Already Installed

Open PowerShell or Command Prompt and run:

```shell
dotnet --version
```

> If it returns a version (e.g., 8.0.100), it means the SDK is already installed.

### 1.2: Download the installer

Go to the Official [.NET Download Page](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download)

Choose the version you want (e.g., .NET 8 (LTS) or .NET 9 if you want the latest version), then click ".NET SDK" under your desired version.
to download `Windows x64 installer` (e.g., dotnet-sdk-8.0.x-win-x64.exe).

### 1.3 Run the installer.

Follow the setup wizard (Next → Accept → Install → Finish).

> You need to have admin rights to run the installer.

### 1.4: Verify Installation

After installation, open PowerShell or CMD and run:

```shell
dotnet --info
```

## 2. Install sdk via tarball

### 2.1: Check if .NET is Already Installed

Open PowerShell or Command Prompt and run:

```shell
dotnet --version
```

### 2.2: Download the tarball

Go to the Official [.NET Download Page](https://dotnet.microsoft.com/download)

Choose the version, and click on `All .NET 9.0 downloads`, You should arrive at a page like https://dotnet.microsoft.com/en-us/download/dotnet/9.0

Now you have multiple choice. The tarball is in the Binaries column. 

place the .zip file in a directory and unzip it.

### 2.3 Add dotnet bin directory to path 

To run the dotnet commands in `PowerShell` or `cmd`, you need to add the dotnet bin directory to path 

If you have admin rights, you can add it to your system path. If you don't have the admin rights, you can add it
to your account path environment variables.

Under your account environment variables, select `Path` → click `Edit`. Then add the dotnet bin directory path.

For example, I put it under `C:\Users\PLIU\Documents\Tool\dotnet\SDK_9.0.203`.


### 2.4: Verify Installation

After installation, open PowerShell or CMD and run:

```shell
dotnet --info
```
